The Stuxnet Worm
Paul Mueller and Babak Yadegari
1 Overview of Stuxnet
Stuxnet is a sophisticated worm designed to target only specific Siemens SCADA (industrial control)
systems.
It makes use of an unprecedented four 0-day vulnerabilities- attacks that make use of a security
vulnerability in an application, before the vulnerability is known to the application’s developers.
It also uses rootkits - advanced techniques to hide itself from users and anti-malware software -
on both Windows and the control computers it targets. It employs two stolen digital certificates to
sign its drivers, and its creators needed a large amount of knowledge of its targeted systems. See
Figure 1 for an overview.
It was discovered in June 2010, but an early version appeared a year earlier. It is widely
suspected of targeting Iran’s uranium enrichment program, since it is rather specific about what it
attacks, and this matches the Iranian Natanz enrichment plant.
One indication that Stuxnet targeted Iran’s nuclear program is that it only targets facilities that
have a certain specific physical layout. The layout of the centrifuges in a facility such as Natanz is
called a cascade, and describes how the centrifuges are piped together; this is done in stages, and
the centrifuges within one stage are piped in parallel.
Iranian President Ahmadinejad visited Natanz on April 8, 2008, and photos of the visit were
published on his website as a photo-op. In one of the photos (Figure 2) is what appears to be a
monitor showing the structure of a so-called IR-1 (for Iran-1 centrifuge) cascade. This structure,
giving the number of centrifuges in each stage, matches the Stuxnet code exactly.
Iran’s nuclear program launched in the 1950s with the Shah of Iran obtaining non weapons-
related assistance from the United States’ “Atoms for Peace” program. The program’s inception
was delayed because of the 1979 revolution and after that because of the Iran-Iraq war. However,
Iran’s new leaders were interested in continuing the nuclear program and started getting help from
other countries to further it.
In 2002, an Iranian opposition group publicly revealed two undeclared nuclear facilities, resulting
in Iran admitting to having constructed facilities for fuel enrichment and heavy water production,
ostensibly for use in research reactors. Iran suspended its plans in 2003 but resumed them in 2006
and insists that it has the right to establish its own uranium enrichment program.
Iran maintains that its nuclear program is entirely peaceful. However, the IAEA (International
Atomic Energy Agency) insists that Iran does not comply with the safeguard program it has agreed
to, resulting in various sanctions against Iran by the UN Security Council [9]. It is widely believed
that Iran is in fact working toward producing nuclear weapons.
Assuming that Stuxnet was intended to damage this suspected nuclear weapons program, it
was somewhat effective: it may have destroyed 1,000 centrifuges at Natanz, about 11% of the total
number installed at the time. Also, Iran doesn’t have an unlimited number of centrifuges, and
the ones they do have tend to fail relatively often, so such a decrease is significant, albeit not
1
Figure 1: A high-level overview of Stuxnet.
Figure 2: Iran’s president revealed the cascade structure at Natanz: The dark lines at the bottom
probably denote the division between stages; yellow lines have been added above them to make the
division clearer. from right to left- 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 20, 16. (Photo: Office of the Presidency of
the Islamic Republic of Iran)
2
immediately fatal to the program. In addition, Stuxnet decreased production of enriched uranium
and likely sowed chaos within the Iranian nuclear program.
Israel and the U.S. are the leading suspects as Stuxnet’s creators. Neither are friends of Iran’s
current leadership (to put it mildly) and both, especially Israel, fear a nuclear-armed Iran.
Israel has said that cyberwarfare is an important part of its defense strategy, and has a military
intelligence unit dedicated to it, according to Wikipedia. Furthermore, Israeli officials are said to
have responded with “wide smiles” when they were asked in 2010 whether Israel created Stuxnet [5].
Furthermore, a video celebrating the operational successes of the head of the Israeli Defence
Forces’ Lieutenant General Gabi Ashkenazi, shown at his retirement party, showed Stuxnet as being
among them, according to the Daily Telegraph [15].
Before Stuxnet had been discovered, according toWikipedia, “John Bumgarner, a former intelli-
gence officer and member of the United States Cyber-Consequences Unit (US-CCU)” had published
an article describing a Stuxnet-like attack on centrifuges, and claimed that such attacks against
nations enriching uranium in violation of international treaties are legitimate. This, combined with
some US officials’ not-quite-denials of involvement, raise suspicions that the US participated in
Stuxnet’s creation, despite official denials.
2 Operation of Stuxnet
One thing that differentiates Stuxnet from more run-of-the-mill malicious software is that its cre-
ators have incorporated lots of capabilities into it. These range from exploiting multiple zero-day
vulnerabilities, modifying system libraries, attacking Step7 installations (Siemens’ SCADA control
software) and running an RPC server, to installing signed drivers on Windows operating systems.
Figure 3 shows an overview of multiple components which are present in the malware. This section
describes these components and their various purposes.
Stuxnet spreads via several vectors, no doubt selected to ultimately allow it to infect the PLCs
it targets. It is capable of auto-updating, so that it can update old versions of itself to newer
versions available on a local network. It communicates with command and control servers to
provide information on its spread to its creators and also provide another way for it to be updated.
It conceals its presence and the source of its destructive effects from plant personnel, who may be
totally unaware that it is the cause of unexplained problems.
2.1 How Stuxnet Spreads
Stuxnet spreads readily, but it also contains safeguards to limit its spread. It only infects three
computers from a given infected flash drive and is hardcoded to stop spreading itself after June 24,
2012.
As illustrated in Figure 4, Stuxnet employs several methods to spread itself:
Via USB flash drives The ultimate destination of Stuxnet is the computers that control the
centrifuges. These are called PLCs (Programmable Logic Controllers), and are special-purpose
computers, used for controlling electronic devices or systems, such as industrial systems.
The PLCs are connected to computers that control and monitor them, and typically, neither are
connected to the Internet. Therefore, Stuxnet needs some other vector to reach those computers,
and so it is capable of propagating via USB flash drives.
In the case of Natanz, the infected flash drives may have been introduced to the control com-
puters via outside contractors working at the plant.
Different versions of Stuxnet use different ways to do this: recent versions use an Windows LNK
vulnerability and older versions use an autorun.inf file vulnerability.
3
Stuxnet
The Internet
Futbol-themed
C&C websites
RPC Server
Drivers
Another Stuxnet
USB drives
Step 7
System libraries
Update
Send and
receive info
Figure 3: Stuxnet’s various components
Figure 4: Stuxnet employs many ways to reach its target PLCs.
4
• LNK vulnerability (CVE-2010-2568)
Stuxnet registers code to an infected Windows computer that, upon a USB drive being in-
serted, copies Stuxnet to the drive. Interestingly, an existing copy of Stuxnet on the external
drive will be removed if that drive has already infected three computers.
In addition to the Stuxnet DLL and a loader for it, the malware creates four .lnk files on
the removable drive. These are used to execute the loader when a user views the drive; four
are needed in order to target different versions of Windows.
• autorun.inf file
An autorun.inf file is a file that causes Windows to automatically run a file on removable
media when that media is inserted into the computer. Older versions of Stuxnet place an
autorun.inf file on flash drives that are inserted into an infected computer.
However, instead of using a separate file, it inserts the code for itself directly into the autorun
file, along with valid commands to infect the computer using this code. Windows ignores the
Stuxnet data portion, since it ignores invalid commands in an autorun.inf file.
Via WinCC Stuxnet searches for computers running Siemens WinCC, an interface to their
SCADA systems. It connects using a password hardcoded into WinCC, and attacks its database
using SQL commands to upload and start a copy of itself on the WinCC computer.
Via network shares Stuxnet can use Windows shared folders to propagate itself over a local
network. It places a dropper file on any shares on remote computers, and schedules a task to
execute it. ESET [11] says the task is scheduled to run the next day, whereas Symantec [7] claims
it is scheduled for two minutes after the file is shared.
Via the MS10-061 print spooler 0-day vulnerability Stuxnet copies itself, places the
copy on remote computers via this vulnerability, and then executes the copy, thereby infecting the
remote machines. In brief, Stuxnet “prints” itself to two files in the %system% directory on each
target machine, using the 0-day privilege escalation. It then executes the dropper file to infect the
computer.
Via the MS08-067 SMB vulnerability If a remote computer has this vulnerability, Stuxnet
can send a malformed path over SMB (a protocol for sharing files and other resources between
computers); this allows it to execute arbitrary code on the remote machine, thereby propagating
itself to it.
Via Step7 Projects Stuxnet will infect Siemens SIMATIC Step7 industrial control projects
that are opened on an infected computer. It does this by modifying DLLs (Windows Dynamic Link
Library; a library of shared objects: code, data, and resources) and an .exe file in the WinCC
Simatic manager, so that they execute Stuxnet code as well. The additional code will insert Stuxnet
into Step7 project directories.
2.2 Auto-updating
Stuxnet can update itself from infected Step7 projects. If an infected project is opened, and its
version of Stuxnet is newer than the one already on the computer, the one on the computer will be
updated.
Additionally, Stuxnet uses a built-in peer-to-peer network to update old instances of itself to
the latest version present on a local network. Each copy starts an RPC (Remote Procedure Call)
server, and listens for connections. Other instances, connecting via their RPC clients, are able to
update themselves if their version is older, or update the server if it is older.
5
2.3 Command and Control servers
After Stuxnet establishes itself on a computer, it tries to contact one of two servers via HTTP:
• www.mypremierfutbol.com
• www.todaysfutbol.com
It sends its IP address, some unknown data, and a payload consisting of, in part, information
on the host OS, the host computer name and domain name, and a flag indicating if Siemens Step7
or WinCC, which Stuxnet targets, is installed [7].
The server may respond by sending a Windows executable, which it can specify to be loaded
into the current process or a different one via RPC. This allows Stuxnet’s authors to update it
remotely, or to run entirely new malware on the infected computers.
Interestingly, the data sent to and from the server is encrypted, each way with a different
31 byte key (of seemingly random bytes) that is XORed with the data. However, both keys are
static, and so don’t provide much protection against someone who has intercepted multiple such
communications.
The command and control servers have since been rendered impotent by redirecting their DNS
entries (initially to nowhere and later to fake servers, set up by Symantec, to gather information
on the worm.)
According to Symantec, Stuxnet is able to update itself to communicate with new command
and control servers, but this hasn’t been observed in the field.
2.4 Infection
The malware’s main module consists of both user-mode and kernel-mode components. The user-
mode functions are mainly designed to do several things: 1) inject it into a chosen process - add
its own code into a running process, which results in the execution of that code in the target
process’s address space; 2) check for the appropriate platform; 3) escalate privileges; and 4) install
two kernel-mode drivers, one for running Stuxnet after reboot and the other as a rootkit to hide
its files.
2.4.1 User-Mode
The main module DLL exports 21 functions (Figure 5). Stuxnet starts by calling export 15. In
this function, it first checks if it is running on an appropriate Windows version. Assuming it is and
the machine is not infected already, it uses one of the zero-day exploits, depending on the version
of Windows, to elevate its privileges.
Export 16 is then called to continue installation: it injects code into the services.exe process
to infect removable drives and infects any Step7 projects it finds. It then checks a registry value
and aborts the infection if it matches. It also checks to ensure the current date is not later than
June 24, 2012, and checks if it is running the latest version. If all these checks pass, it will drop
two driver files to install the driver files, Mrxnet.sys and Mrxcls.sys [7].
It is unclear if there is any special significance to the cutoff date of June 24th; it may be
arbitrary, used to stop Stuxnet’s spread after it had (presumably) already done “enough” damage.
6
Figure 5: Stuxnet’s main library export functions as shown by Dependency Walker
Figure 6: Stuxnet installs two drivers signed with stolen signatures
7
s7otbxsx.dll
s7otbxdx.dll
Step 7
PLC
Figure 7: Stuxnet wraps the library used to communicate with the PLCs
2.4.2 Kernel-Mode
Stuxnet installs two kernel-mode drivers. Mrxcls.sys is a driver signed by a Realtek certificate as
shown in Figure 6. When Stuxnet wants to install it onto the system, it marks it as a boot startup
so it starts in the early stages of Windows boot. This driver first reads a registry key which has
been written in the installation step and contains the information for injecting Stuxnet images into
certain processes.
The other driver, Mrxnet.sys, is actually the rootkit and is also digitally signed by a Realtek
certificate. It creates a device object and attaches it to the system’s device objects so that it can
monitor all requests sent to these objects. The purpose of this job is to hide files which meet certain
criteria from users.
2.5 Attack phase
Stuxnet is not harmful to ordinary users since its aim is to modify Simatic PLCs manufactured
by Siemens [14]. Step7 programs, which control and monitor these PLCs, use a library named
s7otbxdx.dll to communicate with the actual PLC to read or modify its contents (codes). Stuxnet
gets control over all requests sent to the PLC by wrapping this library.
In addition, Stuxnet writes its own malicious code to target certain specific PLCs. It hides its
malicious code from users by returning original code blocks instead of the modified blocks upon a
read request, as illustrated in Figure 7 [7].
The code Stuxnet infects PLCs with contains three attack sequences, named A, B, and C in
Symantec’s report. Sequences A and B are similar, with only slight differences, and have the same
effects. Sequence C is more advanced but is incomplete and is never executed.
Sequences A and B perform their attacks by running the centrifuge rotors at too-low and too-
high frequencies (as low and high as 2 and 1410 Hz, respectively). Interestingly, the periods in
which they command the centrifuges to spin at these inappropriate speeds are quite short (50 and
15 minutes, respectively), and are separated by about 27 days between attacks, possibly indicating
8
Figure 8: Diagram of a P-1 centrifuge. The Natanz centrifuges are based on the P-1. (Diagram:
Institute for Science and International Security)
the designers wanted Stuxnet to operate very stealthily over long periods of time. See Figure 8 for
a diagram of a centrifuge similar to the ones used at Natanz.
Although the time spans during which the centrifuges are slowed down or sped up are prob-
ably too short for them to actually reach the minimum and maximum values, they still result in
significant slow-downs and speed-ups. The slow speeds are sufficient to result in inefficiently pro-
cessed uranium, and the high speeds are probably sufficient to result in centrifuges actually being
destroyed, as they are at the centrifuges’ maximum speed limit.
2.6 Concealment of attack activities
Stuxnet hides itself from plant personnel by installing rootkits on infected Windows computers and
on infected PLCs, in order to hide its files. By installing a driver on Windows computers, it hides
itself by manipulating requests sent to devices.
By intercepting calls to s7otbxdx.dll, Stuxnet hides the malicious code it writes to PLCs to
9
sabotage centrifuges, and also prevents those malicious codes from being overwritten.
Before the malware runs an attack routine, it records the centrifuges’ normal operating frequen-
cies and feeds this recorded data to the WinCC monitor program during the attack. The result is
that the system shows normal operation instead of alerting personnel to the anomalous frequencies
the centrifuges are actually running at.
Stuxnet also modifies some routines on the PLCs, preventing a safe shutdown even if the
operator finds out that the system is not operating normally [7].
3 Conclusion
Stuxnet is a malware of such sophistication that it is most likely the work of one or more nations,
with Israel and/or the U.S. being the presumed author(s). It spread around the globe, but most of
its infections were in Iran, and it seems that the only place it activated its payload was Natanz.
Now, almost two years after Stuxnet’s discovery, Iran appears to have purged it from their
Natanz equipment, according to a Reuters article [8]. The article was published in February 2012,
but states that it is unknown exactly when the Iranians succeeded in clearing their systems of the
infection, so they may have been clear for some time now.
It is likely that Stuxnet would have had a greater impact had it not been noticed by security
researchers, who subsequently published detailed reports on it (See [7] and [11] for two good exam-
ples). It probably destroyed about 1,000 centrifuges and delayed Iran’s nuclear weapon program,
but likely didn’t have as much impact as its creators had hoped for.
Now that the Iranians are on the alert for Stuxnet in specific and such threats in general, it will
likely be harder to pull off another such attack against them. Thus, the best chance to derail or at
least significantly delay Iran’s nuclear weapons program has probably passed, which leaves us with
the worrying prospect of Israel, with or without U.S. aid, militarily attacking Iran.
Stuxnet has also increased awareness of the vulnerability of industrial control systems, which
haven’t been the target of many attacks. This should result in them becoming more hardened
against attack as time goes on, but this is balanced against the increased risk of such attacks.
Stuxnet has increased the likelihood that malware authors, be they nation-states or smaller
entities, will perpetrate similar attacks in the future. It has proven such attacks possible, raised
awareness of them and perhaps interest in them among malicious entities, and provided a sophis-
ticated code base for malware authors to study and modify.
Presumably, assuming the U.S. and/or Israel were Stuxnet’s creators, they did a cost-benefit
analysis taking into account its potential to deter Iran’s nuclear ambitions against the increased
risk of similar attack against themselves and others. They must have concluded that the risk was
worth it. Hopefully they won’t be proven wrong in the coming years.
4 Overview of References
Symantec has produced a detailed, highly-recommended examination of Stuxnet [7]. ESET has
produced a similarly detailed report, although with a somewhat different focus [11]. The Langner
company, headed by Ralph Langner, was instrumental in deciphering Stuxnet. There is a lot of
interesting information on Stuxnet and other topics on their blog [6]. Wikipedia has a good page
on Stuxnet [5]. ISIS’ website [1] has a wealth of information on Stuxnet, Iran’s nuclear program,
and other interesting topics. Finally, for some lighter reading, Wired.com has an interesting story
about how Symantec, Langner, and others figured out what Stuxnet was [16].
10
References
[1] The website of isis. Technical report, World Wide Web, http://www.isis-online.org.
[2] David Albright, Paul Brannan, and Christina Walrond. Did stuxnet take out 1,000 centrifuges
at the natanz enrichment plant? Technical report, World Wide Web, http://isis-online.
org/uploads/isis-reports/documents/stuxnet_FEP_22Dec%2010.pdf, December 2010.
[3] David Albright, Paul Brannan, and Christina Walrond. Stuxnet malware and natanz: Update
of isis december 22, 2010 report. Technical report, World Wide Web, http://isis-online.
org/uploads/isis-reports/documents/stuxnet_update_15%Feb2011.pdf, February 2011.
[4] Mark Clayton. Stuxnet cyberweapon looks to be one on a production line, researchers
say. Technical report, World Wide Web, http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/2012/0106/
Stuxnet-cyberweapon-looks-to-be-%one-on-a-production-line-researchers-say,
January 2012.
[5] Contributors. Stuxnet. Technical report,WorldWideWeb, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Stuxnet.
[6] Ralph Langner et. al. The blog of langner.com. Technical report, World Wide Web, http:
//www.langner.com/en/blog/.
[7] Nicolas Falliere, Liam O Murchu, and Eric Chien. W32.stuxnet dossier (version 1.4). Technical
report, World Wide Web, http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/
security_respons%e/whitepapers/w32_stuxnet_dossier.pdf, February 2011.
[8] Mark Hosenball. Experts say iran has ”neutralized” stuxnet virus. Techni-
cal report, World Wide Web, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/02/14/
us-iran-usa-stuxnet-idUSTRE81%D24Q20120214, February 2012.
[9] Nuclear Threat Initiative. Iran’s profile. Technical report, World Wide Web, http://www.
nti.org/country-profiles/iran/nuclear/, March 2012.
[10] Ralph Langner and associates. The prez shows his cascade shape. Technical report,WorldWide
Web, http://www.langner.com/en/2011/12/07/the-prez-shows-his-cascade-shape/,
December 2011.
[11] Aleksandr Matrosov, Eugene Rodionov, David Harley, and Juraj Malcho. Stuxnet under the
microscope (revision 1.31). Technical report, World Wide Web, go.eset.com/us/resources/
white-papers/Stuxnet_Under_the_Microscope.pdf.
[12] Symantec Security Response. W32.duqu - the precursor to the next stuxnet. Technical re-
port, World Wide Web, http://www.symantec.com/connect/w32_duqu_precursor_next_
stuxnet, October 2011.
[13] Mark Russinovich. Analyzing a stuxnet infection with the sysinternals tools, part 1. Technical
report, World Wide Web, http://blogs.technet.com/b/markrussinovich/archive/2011/
03/30/3416253.a%spx, March 2011.
[14] Wikipedia. Simatic s5 plc. Technical report, World Wide Web, http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Simatic_S5_PLC/, February 2012.
11
[15] Christopher Williams. Israeli security chief celebrates stuxnet cyber attack. Techni-
cal report, World Wide Web, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/8326274/
Israeli-security-chi%ef-celebrates-Stuxnet-cyber-attack.html, February 2011.
[16] Kim Zetter. How digital detectives deciphered stuxnet, the most menacing malware in his-
tory. Technical report, World Wide Web, http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/07/
how-digital-detectives-deciphe%red-stuxnet/all/1, 2011.
5 Credits for Images Used in the Figures
• The US and Israel flag images come from the game Freeciv, and are licensed under the GPL
(version 2).
• The nuclear power plant image is from MSN.com, via http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/
45524978/ns/technology and science-space/t/could-natural-nuclear-reactors-have-boosted-life/
(And yes, we know Natanz isn’t actually a nuclear power plant).
• The PLC image is from alibaba.com
• The USB flash drive image is from psdgraphics.com
• The centrifuge image is from
http://www.turbosquid.com/3d-models/blender-nuclear-centrifuge/663104
12